Okay, so workshop time.
Now it's time to write some code.
We're going to actually write that
code and see that code in action.
For that, remember that you have, I will
show you that again just in case, the URL.
That's
github.com/firtman/javascript-background.
So get that repo download the ZIP file,
doesn't matter.
And there I will show you what we have.
I will open VS Code,
I already have it here.
Let me first get into the folder.
This is the folder that you will get.
By the way, let me show you what
you will have in that package.
While you have the slides,
PDF version of the slides.
What about HiddenCam?
There is a HiddenCam project there.
That's the one that it's testing
what happens in the background.
In case you want to play with that
later it's these brushing, this one.
But I recorded some videos so
it will be better for these.
And then you have background-final and
initial.
Recommend you start with initial but
in case you want to get the final code.
For whatever reason you don't wanna code
with me, you have the final version there.
I'm going to open background-initial here.
That includes a pretty simple for now,
node.js server that I will show
you later why we need that server.
It's mostly for the web push part
because that's server side, this one.
And from here I will open a terminal and
run npm install.
So it will install the dependencies and
after that npm start.
This project has a server.
You can see the server later we
are going to see what's inside.
That for
now is rendering the public folder with
an html CSS and
a couple of JavaScript files.
But there are a lot of holes
here that we are going to
fill during the rest of today.
Trying to open opening
this is localhost 4000.
You can change the port if
you don't like that one.
This is what you're going to get.
Background Execution and
a couple of buttons to test
different APIs that are empty.
So they are doing nothing right now.
The only thing that I already have
is that if I open here a console,
just to show you,
I can actually call a log function.
The log function will actually
send a message to a little low
that we have there.
So we can actually see what's
going on in our APIs, okay?
It's just a text area and
it's adding elements inside,
nothing really, really complicated.
Hello Frontend Master, it appears there.
It's just that, so we are going to
use that API to see what's going on.
The first thing that we want to do here is
to test our Page Visibility API.
That's the API that will
tell us where we are,
if we are going to hide the window or
if we are going back to the window.
For that I will open in
a scripts background.js.
You see that it's kind of empty
with a couple of placeholders.
The idea is that here we are going to
play with the Page Visibility API first.
Again, this is the API that we will use to
detect if we are going into the background
or coming back to the background.
And we can use this to stop timers to make
decisions, to save data, or whatever.
Well in the Page Visibility part,
I'm going to say window.addEventListener,
and the name of the event
is visibiltychange.
Remember event names are all lowercase,
no snake case, or no underscore, nothing.
We're going to create an event handler for
it.
And here again, we need to check
the document.visibilityState.
And we're going to check,
for example, if it's hidden.
That is that We are in the background.
Actually, are we going to the background
or are we in the background?
Actually, we are already
in the background, okay?
So this is executed, not before.
Actually, you cannot prevent default.
We are not preventing
going to the background.
We are in the background, we have just
arrived in the background of space.
And if not,
we are back from the background.
That's the simplest algorithm.
Of course you there are many other
options that you can do here but
the simplest algorithm is this one.
Something that I can do here, for example,
if I go into the background,
we can create a constant.
We can call it now,
that will create a new Date, and
we're going to get the Locale.
I'm going to say toLocale,
not get, TimeString.
Then we can log that we are Going
to the background at now.
So it will give us the time.
I'm using the backtick.
This is a template string of ECMAScript.
I'm just taking the current time and
sending that to the log.
If I save this and we run this we're
going to start seeing if this is working.
So, going back to a browser,
any browser, it doesn't matter.
If you refresh, and then for example,
you open a new tab and you go back.
You can see that it went to
the background at that time.
And you can see that even
the two to three seconds that we
have on iOS is enough to
execute this handler, okay?
So even in iOS,
this is going to be executed even
if you press the home screen.
The only situation where this
event is not going to re-fire is
if you kill the browser's process or
the PWA process from the Task Manager.
If you kill the browser
you're killing the process.
The browser will not even have time to
execute your event handler, make sense?
That's the only situation where
this event handler won't be fire.
Of course here we can do the same log.
But something maybe more
interesting is that when
you're going back from the background.
Something that you may want
to know is how much time has
passed from the last session.
This is a pretty common use case,
because maybe the user is going back
to your web app a minute after.
So it's coming from
the background a minute after.
Or maybe it's a day, or maybe it's a week.
If you have enough RAM in your phone, and
you haven't opened so many other apps.
Maybe a week later, you go back to
the PWA and it was still there.
And of course, it's not the same.
It depends on your app.
It depends on what you're
doing in your website.
If one week has passed, maybe you want
to do something else, reload the page.
Or you don't want to restore the state
because maybe you're a newspaper and
of course everything is old there.
It doesn't make any sense.
It depends on the product that you're
creating what you're going to do here.
A simple way that you have
to actually detect how much
time has passed is that we
can create a global variable.
Of course we can do this better
with our op or whatever,
but we can call this
backgroundInitialTimestamp.
When we are going to the background,
I'm going to say that
I need the Timestamp.
By the way, do you know how to get a high
performance Timestamp in JavaScript?
Actually you can use the new Date and
get the Timestamp, but
that's actually not really accurate.
Also it's taking some time because it's
creating an object in JavaScript to
actually taking the time is
changing the observation.
It's performance.now, so it's part of the-
>> We just started using that and
it's really cool.
>> It's really cool.
Yeah, it's high performance so
it's giving you precision in nanoseconds.
So nanoseconds is actually
a lot of precision.
And now but
actually when we are here we need to just
create the constant for
how much time has passed.
Something like this so
we are going to say it's another
performance- the InitialTimestamp, okay?
Something like this but
this is in milliseconds, it's fine.
But it's a millisecond but
it's a float value,
because the precision is up
to nanoseconds, actually.
Maybe what I want is just
the integer part of it.
I can also round with Math.round.
Let me put that here, something like that.
And then I can log how
much time has passed.
We can say We are back
from the background.
After timeElapsed, and we can say this
in seconds, something like that.
Again, you use that time to know how
much time has passed since last session.
Again, if it's a matter of hours,
days, minutes,
seconds, anything can happen here.
Make sense?
There you're going to use that
thing to make a decision.
Are you keeping the session?
Maybe even you need to revalidate your
auth authentication token, who knows?
Make sense, because maybe you
are coming back from a hibernation and
suspension state.
So you were suspended and
now you're coming back any time.
In fact think about this on
desktop a browser session.
Have you ever used session storage?
This is part of the web storage API.
It's similar to local storage, but
the data leaves only within the session,
within the browser session.
If you close the browser, everything
in session storage will be cleared out.
So a question for you, what's a session?
What's a browser session
in a mobile device?
What's the lifespan of a browser session?
Are you closing the browser?
When do you close the browser on iPhone or
Android?
You don't close it.
You just press the home screen button or
you go to the home
screen with the Chester.
If you go in back,
is it the same session or not?
So what's a session?
It's not so simple.
That's why session storage and
mobile devices are completely useless.
Because the session as a concept in
the browser doesn't exist anymore.
And we have there the same problem.
Maybe two weeks after the browser will
tell you it's the same session
because the browser was still there.
Because you never closed the browser.
Something similar happens here.
If you don't have any typo,
any errors, if I try this.
If I go to a new tab and come back,
it's showing me the data.
I can increase this a little bit.
And that also happens if I minimize
the browser then I open the browser again.
It's giving out when you go back, when you
get out, when you go to the background,
when you're going back.
Yeah, question?
>> What about closing the tab and
then reopening it?
>> That's a good question.
If you close the tab, I can try that but
what will happen is that we
won't see the data because
I'm not saving the data here.
In fact, look at that, I was really fast
enough to actually see that happening.
So it says NaNs, so, what's going on?
That's a new page navigation.
It's a new page navigation.
One is getting out and
another one is getting in.
It's a different page navigation,
so technically you're getting
out of that app and
that app is actually discarded completely.
It's a new page navigation.
A new page navigation will
always be a new app instance.
So in this case, if you have that use
case, maybe the option is to use.
To store the data, to store the state and
restore the state here.
This is actually a completely
new page navigation.
If you close the app and you open
the app again, I mean, you have a PWA,
if I have it still here.
Let me see if I have it,
if you open a PWA.
This one, this is a PWA.
Let me show you this.
Let's install a PWA on iOS, Squoosh.
That is a PWA to reduce
the size of images and
because it's a PWA I can install it.
Then I can open my PWA.
The question is what happens
if I close the window?
That's the window for the current PWA,
and open the app again?
It's a new page navigation.
I'm not going back,
it's a completely new page navigation.
And the same happens if you close
the tab and you open the tab again.
Make sense?
Cool, well, there are more to see
about the page navigation API.
But with just these codes,
you're covering probably 95% of
your use cases, if not more.
It can get more complicated but
typically with this, it's enough.